Runtime and endpoint reference (#386)
opendatahub-io/opendatahub-documentation: modules/ref-supported-runtimes.adoc

:_module-type: REFERENCE

> [id='supported-runtimes_{context}']

Reviewer: Ensure that the ID matches the module title:

[id='supported-model-serving-runtimes_{context}']

Author: ```suggestion
[id='supported-model-serving-runtimes_{context}']
```

= Supported model-serving runtimes

[role='_abstract']
{productname-short} includes several preinstalled model-serving runtimes. You can use preinstalled model-serving runtimes to start serving models without modifying or defining the runtime yourself.

> You can also add a custom runtime to support a model. 

Reviewer: Could the sentence on line 9 be moved to the end of line 7?

> {productname-short} includes several preinstalled model-serving runtimes. You can use preinstalled model-serving runtimes to start serving models without modifying or defining the runtime yourself.
> 
> You can also add a custom runtime to support a model. 

Author: ```suggestion
{productname-short} includes several preinstalled model-serving runtimes. You can use preinstalled model-serving runtimes to start serving models without modifying or defining the runtime yourself. You can also add a custom runtime to support a model. 
```

ifdef::upstream[]
For help adding a custom runtime, see link:{odhdocshome}/serving-models/#adding-a-custom-model-serving-runtime-for-the-single-model-serving-platform_serving-large-models[Adding a custom model-serving runtime for the single-model serving platform].
endif::[]

ifndef::upstream[]
For help adding a custom runtime, see link:{rhoaidocshome}{default-format-url}/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#adding-a-custom-model-serving-runtime-for-the-single-model-serving-platform_serving-large-models[Adding a custom model-serving runtime for the single-model serving platform].
endif::[]

.Model-serving runtimes

|===
| Name | Description | Exported model format 

> | Caikit Text Generation Inference Server (Caikit-TGIS) Serving Runtime for KServe (1)| A composite runtime for serving models in the Caikit format | Caikit Text Generation 

Author: ```suggestion
| Caikit Text Generation Inference Server (Caikit-TGIS) ServingRuntime for KServe (1)| A composite runtime for serving models in the Caikit format | Caikit Text Generation 
```

| Caikit Standalone ServingRuntime for KServe (2) | A runtime for serving models in the Caikit embeddings format for embeddings tasks | Caikit Embeddings

| OpenVINO Model Server | A scalable, high-performance runtime for serving models that are optimized for Intel architectures | PyTorch, TensorFlow, OpenVINO IR, PaddlePaddle, MXNet, Caffe, Kaldi 

> | Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS) Standalone Serving Runtime for KServe (3) |  A runtime for serving TGI-enabled models | PyTorch Model Formats

Reviewer 2: ServingRuntime

Author: ```suggestion
| Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS) Standalone ServingRuntime for KServe (3) |  A runtime for serving TGI-enabled models | PyTorch Model Formats
```

> | vLLM | A high-throughput and memory-efficient inference and serving runtime for large language models | link:https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/models/supported_models.html[Supported models^]

Author: ```suggestion
| vLLM ServingRuntime for KServe | A high-throughput and memory-efficient inference and serving runtime for large language models | link:https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/models/supported_models.html[Supported models^]
```

|===

ifdef::upstream[]

. The composite Caikit-TGIS runtime is based on link:https://github.com/opendatahub-io/caikit[Caikit^] and link:https://github.com/IBM/text-generation-inference[Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS)^]. To use this runtime, you must convert your models to Caikit format. For an example, see link:https://github.com/opendatahub-io/caikit-tgis-serving/blob/main/demo/kserve/built-tip.md#bootstrap-process[Converting Hugging Face Hub models to Caikit format^] in the link:https://github.com/opendatahub-io/caikit-tgis-serving/tree/main[caikit-tgis-serving^] repository.

. The Caikit Standalone runtime is based on link:https://github.com/caikit/caikit-nlp/tree/main[Caikit NLP^]. To use this runtime, you must convert your models to the Caikit embeddings format. For an example, see link:https://github.com/markstur/caikit-embeddings/blob/df9c9bc93187c0a17cb66b86d609f2cd102be97d/demo/server/bootstrap_model.py[Bootstrap Model^].

> . link:https://github.com/IBM/text-generation-inference[Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS)^] is based on an early fork of link:https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference[Hugging Face TGI^]. Red Hat will continue to develop the standalone TGIS runtime to support TGI models. If a model does not work in the current version of {productname-short}, support might be added in a future version. In the meantime, you can also add your own custom runtime to support a TGI model. For more information, see link:{odhdocshome}/serving-models/#adding-a-custom-model-serving-runtime-for-the-single-model-serving-platform_serving-large-models[Adding a custom model-serving runtime for the single-model serving platform].

Reviewer: When referring to the company Red Hat, use {org-name} instead of hard-coding it.

Author: ```suggestion
. link:https://github.com/IBM/text-generation-inference[Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS)^] is based on an early fork of link:https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference[Hugging Face TGI^]. {org-name} will continue to develop the standalone TGIS runtime to support TGI models. If a model is incompatible in the current version of {productname-short}, support might be added in a future version. In the meantime, you can also add your own custom runtime to support a TGI model. For more information, see link:{odhdocshome}/serving-models/#adding-a-custom-model-serving-runtime-for-the-single-model-serving-platform_serving-large-models[Adding a custom model-serving runtime for the single-model serving platform].
```

> . link:https://github.com/IBM/text-generation-inference[Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS)^] is based on an early fork of link:https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference[Hugging Face TGI^]. Red Hat will continue to develop the standalone TGIS runtime to support TGI models. If a model does not work in the current version of {productname-short}, support might be added in a future version. In the meantime, you can also add your own custom runtime to support a TGI model. For more information, see link:{odhdocshome}/serving-models/#adding-a-custom-model-serving-runtime-for-the-single-model-serving-platform_serving-large-models[Adding a custom model-serving runtime for the single-model serving platform].

Reviewer: The term "does not work" could be replaced with "incompatible".

Author: ```suggestion
. link:https://github.com/IBM/text-generation-inference[Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS)^] is based on an early fork of link:https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference[Hugging Face TGI^]. {org-name} will continue to develop the standalone TGIS runtime to support TGI models. If a model is incompatible in the current version of {productname-short}, support might be added in a future version. In the meantime, you can also add your own custom runtime to support a TGI model. For more information, see link:{odhdocshome}/serving-models/#adding-a-custom-model-serving-runtime-for-the-single-model-serving-platform_serving-large-models[Adding a custom model-serving runtime for the single-model serving platform].
```

endif::[]

ifndef::upstream[]

. The composite Caikit-TGIS runtime is based on link:https://github.com/opendatahub-io/caikit[Caikit^] and link:https://github.com/IBM/text-generation-inference[Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS)^]. To use this runtime, you must convert your models to Caikit format. For an example, see link:https://github.com/opendatahub-io/caikit-tgis-serving/blob/main/demo/kserve/built-tip.md#bootstrap-process[Converting Hugging Face Hub models to Caikit format^] in the link:https://github.com/opendatahub-io/caikit-tgis-serving/tree/main[caikit-tgis-serving^] repository.

. The Caikit Standalone runtime is based on link:https://github.com/caikit/caikit-nlp/tree/main[Caikit NLP^]. To use this runtime, you must convert your models to the Caikit embeddings format. For an example, see link:https://github.com/markstur/caikit-embeddings/blob/df9c9bc93187c0a17cb66b86d609f2cd102be97d/demo/server/bootstrap_model.py[Bootstrap Model^].

> . link:https://github.com/IBM/text-generation-inference[Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS)^] is based on an early fork of link:https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference[Hugging Face TGI^]. Red Hat will continue to develop the standalone TGIS runtime to support TGI models. If a model does not work in the current version of {productname-short}, support might be added in a future version. In the meantime, you can also add your own custom runtime to support a TGI model. For more information, see link:{rhoaidocshome}{default-format-url}/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#adding-a-custom-model-serving-runtime-for-the-single-model-serving-platform_serving-large-models[Adding a custom model-serving runtime for the single-model serving platform].

Reviewer: See previous comments about {org-name} and "does not work"

Author: ```suggestion
. link:https://github.com/IBM/text-generation-inference[Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS)^] is based on an early fork of link:https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference[Hugging Face TGI^]. {org-name} will continue to develop the standalone TGIS runtime to support TGI models. If a model is incompatible in the current version of {productname-short}, support might be added in a future version. In the meantime, you can also add your own custom runtime to support a TGI model. For more information, see link:{rhoaidocshome}{default-format-url}/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#adding-a-custom-model-serving-runtime-for-the-single-model-serving-platform_serving-large-models[Adding a custom model-serving runtime for the single-model serving platform].
```

endif::[]

.Deployment requirements

|===
| Name | Default protocol | Additonal protocol | Model mesh support | Single node OpenShift support | Deployment mode

> | Caikit Text Generation Inference Server (Caikit-TGIS) Serving Runtime for KServe | REST | gRPC | No | Yes | Raw and serverless

Author: ```suggestion
| Caikit Text Generation Inference Server (Caikit-TGIS) ServingRuntime for KServe | REST | gRPC | No | Yes | Raw and serverless
```

| Caikit Standalone ServingRuntime for KServe | REST | gRPC | No | Yes | Raw and serverless 

| OpenVINO Model Server | REST | None | Yes | Yes | Raw and serverless 

> | Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS) Standalone Serving Runtime for KServe (3) | gRPC | None | No | Yes | Raw and serverless

Reviewer 2: ServingRuntime - one word

Author: ```suggestion
| Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS) Standalone ServingRuntime for KServe (3) | gRPC | None | No | Yes | Raw and serverless
```

> | vLLM | REST | None | No | Yes | Raw and serverless 

Reviewer 2: Suggest replacing *vLLM* with *vLLM ServingRuntime for KServe*

Author: ```suggestion
| vLLM ServingRuntime for KServe | REST | None | No | Yes | Raw and serverless 
```

| Caikit Text Generation Inference Server (Caikit-TGIS) Serving Runtime for KServe (1)| A composite runtime for serving models in the Caikit format | Caikit Text Generation | Latest version of `caikit/caikit-nlp` listed in link:https://github.com/opendatahub-io/caikit-tgis-serving/blob/main/pyproject.toml#L10-L12[`opendatahub-io/caikit-tgis-serving`^]  

| Caikit Standalone ServingRuntime for KServe (2) | A runtime for serving models in the Caikit embeddings format for embeddings tasks | Caikit Embeddings | Latest version of `caikit/caikit-nlp` listed in link:https://github.com/opendatahub-io/caikit-nlp[`opendatahub-io/caikit-caikit-nlp`^]

| OpenVINO Model Server | A scalable, high-performance runtime for serving models that are optimized for Intel architectures | PyTorch, TensorFlow, OpenVINO IR, PaddlePaddle, MXNet, Caffe, Kaldi | {productname-short} 2.11: 2024.1 

| Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS) Standalone Serving Runtime for KServe (3) |  A runtime for serving TGI-enabled models | PyTorch Model Formats | Latest version of link:https://github.com/opendatahub-io/caikit-tgis-serving/blob/main/pyproject.toml#L10-L12[`opendatahub-io/caikit-tgis-serving`^]

> | vLLM | A high-throughput and memory-efficient inference and serving runtime for large language models | link:https://docs.vllm.ai/en/latest/models/supported_models.html[Supported models^] | {productname-short}: v0.5.0.post1-99-g8720c92e and v 0.5 .0.post1 

Reviewer 3: I think this will have to be fixed. I think the strategy at this point is to have the latest available upstream release.

So, for 2.12 we're going to have v0.5.3.post1
2.11 had 0.5.0post1-99-g8720c92e
2.10 had version 0.4.2 plus some extra commits from IBM

Author: I'd prefer to make this version-agnostic so I don't have to update this table for each release. What could we put here instead?

. The Caikit Standalone runtime is based on link:https://github.com/caikit/caikit-nlp/tree/main[Caikit NLP^]. To use this runtime, you must convert your models to the Caikit embeddings format. For an example, see link:https://github.com/markstur/caikit-embeddings/blob/df9c9bc93187c0a17cb66b86d609f2cd102be97d/demo/server/bootstrap_model.py[Bootstrap Model^].

. link:https://github.com/IBM/text-generation-inference[Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS)^] is based on an early fork of link:https://github.com/huggingface/text-generation-inference[Hugging Face TGI^]. Red Hat will continue to develop the standalone TGIS runtime to support TGI models. If a model does not work in the current version of {productname-short}, support might be added in a future version. In the meantime, you can also add your own custom runtime to support a TGI model. For more information, see link:{rhoaidocshome}{default-format-url}/serving_models/serving-large-models_serving-large-models#adding-a-custom-model-serving-runtime-for-the-single-model-serving-platform_serving-large-models[Adding a custom model-serving runtime for the single-model serving platform].
endif::[]

.Deployment requirements

|===

> | Name | Protocol | Model mesh support | Single node OpenShift support | Deployment mode | Hardware accelerators

Reviewer 4: The hardware accelerators column is not complete yet.

Author: True, thanks! I can pull this out until we get all the information here.

> | Name | Protocol | Model mesh support | Single node OpenShift support | Deployment mode | Hardware accelerators

Reviewer 4: There's another column in my spreadsheet that will be important as well: Support Tier (Supported, Verified and Tested)

Could we also add that?

Author: What's the distinction between Supported and Verified&Tested? I'd like to make that clear in the docs.

| Caikit Text Generation Inference Server (Caikit-TGIS) Serving Runtime for KServe | REST | No | Yes | Raw and serverless |

> | Caikit Standalone ServingRuntime for KServe | REST | No | Yes | Raw and serverless |

Reviewer 4: Hmm I had gRPC + REST in the spreadsheet. Looks like @christinaexyou changed this back to REST only.

> | Caikit Standalone ServingRuntime for KServe | REST | No | Yes | Raw and serverless |

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/christinaexyou/caikit-embeddings/blob/main/manifests/caikit/caikit-servingruntime-grpc.yaml

> | Caikit Standalone ServingRuntime for KServe | REST | No | Yes | Raw and serverless |

Author: I may have made an error bringing the info over to the doc. 😄 I'll add gRPC back in.

| OpenVINO Model Server | REST | Yes | Yes | Raw and serverless | CPU (x86, ARM), GPU (OpenCL capable, integrated and discrete), AI accelerators (Intel NPU)

| Text Generation Inference Server (TGIS) Standalone Serving Runtime for KServe (3) | gRPC | No | Yes | Raw and serverless |

> | vLLM | REST and gRPC| No | Yes | Raw and serverless | NVIDIA GPUs, AMD CPUs and GPUs, Intel CPUs and GPUs, PowerPC CPUs

Reviewer 5: We do not advertise grpc support to the user
